
The 2022 Java Programmer RoadMap [UPDATED]
An illustrated guide to becoming a Java Developer in 2022 with links to relevant courses

https://miro.medium.com/max/1400/1*aHZm8TsFu062xH5rJ5REcw.png

Hello guys, if you want to become a professional Java developer or want to take your Java skill to next level but are not sure which technology, tools, frameworks, and library you can learn then you have come to the right place. I have been sharing a lot of roadmaps like a Web developer RoadMap, DevOps engineer RoadMap, and React.js developer RoadMap.

One of the requests I received from many of my readers was for creating a Java Developer Roadmap. Since Java is my expertise, It wasn’t a problem to create a Java Developer Roadmap, but it took slightly longer for me to create one because of the limited time I get.

Anyway, I am finally ready to share my Java developer RoadMap with you. This Roadmap contains my years of experience and the unobstructed path of how to become a Java expert.

You will find that this Java roadmap answers many burning questions like which technologies a Java developer should learn? What tools make you a better Java developer? And, which framework a Java developer must absolutely learn.

One of the things I tried with this roadmap is to keep the exposure as short as possible, I have avoided mentioning many alternatives, particularly when it comes to libraries and tools, and stick with industry-standard tools and libraries.

I have kept it simple so that most of the people can follow it and only included the essential stuff, but if there is enough desire, I am thinking to post The Java Developer RoadMap 2.0 to add some advanced things like JVM internals, Profiling, Java 9 Modules, Cloud Native Java, different cloud platforms like AWS, GCP, or Azure, and more advanced tools like Chef for DevOps and much more.

If you are interested, you can find a more exhaustive list of separate blog pots, which I have listed in the further learning section. Anyway, let’s go through this Java Developer RoadMap to understand how to become a Java developer in 2022.

Btw, you by no means need to understand everything on this roadmap to become a rockstar developer. In fact, you don’t even need to take them that seriously if you don’t want to. Instead, use these maps as a starting point to help guide your learning as you go.

https://miro.medium.com/max/1400/1*dAQJ-UDP3altoQKThbQs_w.jpeg

Mandatory skill for any Java developers
Now, let’s go through this Java developer RoadMap step by step and find out how you can learn the essential skills requires to become a Java Developer in 2022:

1. Git & Github
One of the most popular version control systems. It’s just not possible to live without Git anymore. As a programmer, you should be familiar with Git and Github, essential Git concepts like a branch, master, checkout, checking, push and pull, as well essential git commands like git diff, git commit, etc.

I highly recommend Java programmers to learn Git and Github and if you already worked with Git then you can also level up your Git skills and If you need a resource then you can check out The Git Complete Guide on Udemy to start with.

Git Complete Full Course: The Definitive Guide to Git
Git Complete This course is designed to be a comprehensive approach to Git, which means no prior knowledge or…
udemy.com

2. Linux
Not just a web developer but for any programmer, the Linux command line is very, very important, and I strongly recommend you to spend some time learning them. Since most Java applications are server-side, you will often find them running on Linux servers.

That’s why it's imperative for Java developers to be familiar with essential Linux concepts and commands related to files, disk space checking, process management, as well as networking commands.

If you need a resource to level up your Linux skills, I recommend checking out Linux Mastery: Master the Linux Command Line in 11.5 Hours course on Udemy. This is a great course for anyone who wants to learn Linux commands from scratch.

Linux Mastery: Mastering the Linux Command Line
TESTIMONIALS =============================== " Best course on Linux on Udemy so far, I definitely do recommend" …
udemy.com

If you need more resources then you can use these free Linux courses to start learning Linux.

3. Data Structures and Algorithms
These are the building blocks of any program, and a good knowledge of Algorithms and Data Structure is vital for your next job or doing well in your current situation.

You should at least be familiar with essential data structures like an array, linked list, hash table, binary tree, queue, stack, and graph as well problem-solving techniques like dynamic programming.

If you know advanced data structures like Trie, B-Tree, AVL tree, then it’s well and good. But, if you don’t know, then I suggest you join a comprehensive course like Data Structures and Algorithms: Deep Dive Using Java, which will teach you everything about all those fundamentals.

Data Structures and Algorithms: Deep Dive Using Java
Tim's been a professional software developer for over 35 years. During his career, he has worked for major companies…
udemy.com

4. HTTP / HTTPS
The HTTP protocol is the backbone of the web, and a good knowledge of both HTTP and HTTPS is mandatory for a web developer. At least you should know about how HTTP works and what are different HTTP methods and their purposes etc.

5. Computer Science Fundamentals
If you are creating global applications that show information in many different languages across the world, then you should have a good knowledge of character encodings.

It basically tells your browser how to show your data. If you want to learn more about Computer Science, you can also check out Computer Science 101: Master the Theory Behind Programming course on Udemy.

Computer Science Theories 101: Theory Behind Programming
I am a self-taught multi-media designer and computer scientist who has helped bring the creative vision of clients all…
udemy.com

6. SQL
This is another common tech skill that every Java developer should learn as it will help you to troubleshoot backend issues. If you know SQL you can understand the stored procedure, query database, and find out whether the issue is in the Java layer or Database layer.

I highly recommend every Programming whether a Java developer or a Python developer to learn SQL, it’s one of those skills which are easy to learn and serve you for a long time in your career as a programmer or developer.

If you need a resource, I suggest looking at the Complete SQL + Databases Bootcamp: Zero to Mastery course by Andrei Negaoie on ZTM Academy.

Complete SQL + Databases Bootcamp: Zero to Mastery
✓ Become an expert in SQL and Database concepts ✓ Add SQL, PostgreSQL, MySQL, Redis, Database Management/Design to your…
academy.zerotomastery.io

7. Design Patterns
There is no doubt that every programmer should know Git and Github as they are the standard in terms of version control and code repository. If you want to learn and master Design Patterns, particularly OOP Design patterns then I suggest you join the Design Patterns in Java course by Dmitri Nestruk on Udemy. This is a great course to learn the modern implementation of classic design patterns in Java.

Design Patterns in Java for Engineers, Designers, and Architects
This course provides a comprehensive overview of Design Patterns in Java from a practical perspective.
udemy.com

If you need more resources, you can also check out my earlier articles about the best design patterns books and courses to learn Object-Oriented Design patterns in depth.

The 2022 Java Developer RoadMap
Now, let’s explore this Java developer roadmap together and find out what tools, frameworks, libraries, APIs, tools, and skills you can learn to become a professional Java developer in 2022.

1. Tools
The tools section is divided into different sections. First, your IDE, which is your primary tool and can do almost everything you asked for like compile, run, debug, profile, test, compare files and code, refactoring, and much more.

1.1 IDEs
For Java Developers, there are two main IDES, Eclipse and IntelliJIDEA, you can choose any one of them as I have used Eclipse most in my life but I am currently working in IntelliJIDEA so I love both of them, but most of the Java developers I know they work in IDEA.

I suggest you master IDEA shortcuts, views, and all other features it offers to become a true Java Master and if you need a resource, I think IntelliJ IDEA Tricks to Boost Productivity for Java Devs is a great place to start with.

IntelliJ IDEA Tricks to Boost Productivity for Java Devs
If you want to become a real pro Java programmer, you need to master your keyboard and IntelliJ IDEA. You need to be…
udemy.com

1.2 Build Tools
The second part is the build tool, which you need to build and deploy your projects like Maven and Gradle. Any one of these would be enough. I have just listed ANT, but that’s for legacy projects. For all new Java projects, prefer Gradle, it's much more concise than Maven.

If you want to learn both Maven and Gradle, there are not many resources available. If you ask me, I recommend Apache Maven: Beginner to Guru by John Thompson on Udemy.

Apache Maven: Beginner to Guru for Java and Spring Boot Apps
Apache Maven is the most popular Java build tool. Companies and Open Source communities around the world, consider…
udemy.com

And, if you are keen to learn Gradle, I suggest you check out Gradle for Java Developers by another great UDemy instructor, Bharat Thippireddy.

Gradle for java developers
Sample Reviews: Course is certainly very informative and the fundamentals are well explained with real world examples…
udemy.com

1.3 Containers and DevOps Tools
And, the third and most crucial part includes containers like Docker and Kubernetes, CI/CD tools like Jenkins and TeamCity, and Infrastructure automation tools like Ansible.

Out of these Docker is the most important because it makes it easy to set up your development environment as well as it also makes the Deployment of Java Microservices easier.

Kubernetes is a next-level tool and not really needed for all JAva developers, particularly if you are not in DevOps and managing things like scaling and deployment but it's good to know from a knowledge perspective.

I suggest having good knowledge of Docker and basic knowledge of Kubernetes for Java developers and if you need resources, I recommend Maximillian SchwaurzMuller’s Docker & Kubernetes: The Practical Guide course on Udemy. You can learn both of these tools in one course.

Docker & Kubernetes: The Practical Guide
Starting out at the age of 13 I never stopped learning new programming skills and languages. Early I started creating…
udemy.com

If you are interested in learning about these tools, here are some useful courses to learn to build tools and IDEs

2. Java APIs
The next important thing to learn is JDK APIs, which are very, very important for any Java developer. This is quite a big section, and that’s why it’s divided into core areas like Java Collections framework, Java Concurrency, Java IO, and Java 8 APIs, let’s explore each of them

2.1 Java Collections Framework
This is one of the most essential Java API every Java developer should learn. This API provides implementations of standard data structure in Java-like linked list, set, stack, queue, hash table, priority queue, and others.

At least you should know about all everyday objects like ArrayList, HashMap, HashSet, LinkedHashSet, TreeSet, etc. Each of them has its different property like ArrayList is a dynamic array that can grow, HashMap is a standard implementation of the hash table and can be used to store key-value pairs.

Similarly, HashSet is a set implementation that doesn’t allow duplicate elements. I strongly suggest you check Java Fundamentals: Collections course by Richard Warburton on Pluralsight to learn Java Collection Framework in depth.


https://miro.medium.com/max/1400/1*kyrOViCSqrz5ZOo79x2Luw.jpeg

2.2 Java Concurrency
After Java Collections, the next, most crucial API in Java is about multithreading and concurrency, and I firmly believe that if you want to be a competent Java developer, you must have a solid understanding and command of Java Concurrency API.

You should not only have an in-depth understanding of fundamental concepts like Thread, Runnable, Object locking, and Synchronization, but you should also be familiar with concepts like deadlock, livelock, race conditions, and how to deal with them.

You should also learn about advanced Java concepts like synchronizers added on Java 5 and subsequent versions, I mean CyclicBarrier, CountDownLatch, Phaser, and CompleteableFuture, etc., along with Futures and how to perform the async operation in Java.

I know, it’s a lot of stuff, and that’s why I suggest you join an in-depth course like Java Concurrency in Practice bundle from Heinz Kabutz, a Java Champion, and authority when it comes to concurrency and design patterns. This course is a bit expensive, but you will learn a lot more concepts in-depth, which makes it completely worth your time and money.

